Describe spatialDistribution as event triggering (#3795)
modelica/ModelicaSpecification: chapters/operatorsandexpressions.tex

In this case, the internal state of the operator is hidden from the ODE solver.
\end{nonnormative}

\lstinline!spatialDistribution! allows the infinite-dimensional problem below to be solved efficiently with good accuracy:
\begin{align*}
\frac{\partial z(\xi, t)}{\partial t} + v(t) \frac{\partial z(\xi, t)}{\partial \xi} &= 0\\
z(0, t) &= \mathrm{in}_{0}(t) \quad \text{if $v(t) \geq 0$}\\
z(1, t) &= \mathrm{in}_{1}(t) \quad \text{if $v(t) < 0$}
\end{align*}
where $z(\xi, t)$ is the transported quantity, $\xi$ is the normalized spatial coordinate ($0 \le \xi \le 1$), $t$ is the time, $v(t)$ is the normalized transport velocity and the boundary conditions are set at either $\xi = 0$ or $\xi = 1$, depending on the sign of the velocity.
(When discontinuities are present, the differentiation operators above need to be understood in a distributive sense.)

The calling syntax is:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
(out0, out1) = spatialDistribution(in0, in1, x, positiveVelocity,
                                   initialPoints = {0.0, 1.0},
                                   initialValues = {0.0, 0.0});
\end{lstlisting}

> where \lstinline!in0!, \lstinline!in1!, \lstinline!out0!, \lstinline!out1!, and \lstinline!x! are all subtypes of \lstinline!Real!, \lstinline!positiveVelocity! is a \lstinline!Boolean!, and \lstinline!initialPoints! and \lstinline!initialValues! are arrays of subtypes of \lstinline!Real!.

Author: I realize that I forgot to also lift the restriction to `Real`, so that we keep it as similar to `delay` as possible.  This was our intention, right?

\begin{align*}
\frac{\partial z(\xi, t)}{\partial t} + v(t) \frac{\partial z(\xi, t)}{\partial \xi} &= 0\\
z(0, t) &= \mathrm{in}_{0}(t) \quad \text{if $v(t) \geq 0$}\\
z(1, t) &= \mathrm{in}_{1}(t) \quad \text{if $v(t) < 0$}
\end{align*}
where $z(\xi, t)$ is the transported quantity, $\xi$ is the normalized spatial coordinate ($0 \le \xi \le 1$), $t$ is the time, $v(t)$ is the normalized transport velocity and the boundary conditions are set at either $\xi = 0$ or $\xi = 1$, depending on the sign of the velocity.
(When discontinuities are present, the differentiation operators above need to be understood in a distributive sense.)

The calling syntax is:
\begin{lstlisting}[language=modelica]
(out0, out1) = spatialDistribution(in0, in1, x, positiveVelocity,
                                   initialPoints = {0.0, 1.0},
                                   initialValues = {0.0, 0.0});
\end{lstlisting}
The expressions \lstinline!in0!, \lstinline!in1!, \lstinline!out0!, and \lstinline!out1! shall all be subtypes of a common type $T$, where $T$ is either \lstinline!Real!, \lstinline!Integer!, \lstinline!Boolean!, or an enumeration type.

> Further, \lstinline!x! shall be a subtype of \lstinline!Real!, \lstinline!positiveVelocity! is a \lstinline!Boolean!, and \lstinline!initialPoints! and \lstinline!initialValues! are arrays of subtypes of $T$ and \lstinline!Real!, respectively.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The expressions \lstinline!in0!, \lstinline!in1!, \lstinline!out0!, and \lstinline!out1! shall all be subtypes of\lstinline!Real!.
Further, \lstinline!x! shall be a subtype of \lstinline!Real!, \lstinline!positiveVelocity! is a \lstinline!Boolean!, and \lstinline!initialPoints! and \lstinline!initialValues! are arrays of subtypes of \lstinline!Real!.
```
I should have realized this earlier, but non-Real spatialDistribution will cause problems for the initialValues.

Basically we normally interpolate between the initial points, but that doesn't work if the values are non-Reals.

I'm sure that it could be handled in some way, but I'm not confident that we will find all the issues before the release - and since there wasn't that much push for non-Real spatialDistribution I think it can wait.

Author: Fortunately, we have deliberately decided to allow repeated time points in `initialPoints`, because we saw the need to represent discontinuities coming.  The fix is trivial: just require that a change in `initialValues` for a non-`Real` distribution requires a repeated point in `initialPoints`.  This has now been clarified.

I think we should hear whether @MarkusOlssonModelon or @gkurzbach can see any remaining issue.

Reviewer: > Fortunately, we have deliberately decided to allow repeated time points in `initialPoints`, because we saw the need to represent discontinuities coming. The fix is trivial: just require that a change in `initialValues` for a non-`Real` distribution requires a repeated point in `initialPoints`.

As indicated in https://github.com/modelica/ModelicaSpecification/issues/3795#issuecomment-4294161129 it's more complicated, as "non-Real" is more complicated, but there's also a solution.

The operator can not be vectorized according to the vectorization rules described in \cref{scalar-functions-applied-to-array-arguments}.
The operator can be vectorized only with respect to the arguments \lstinline!in0! and \lstinline!in1! (which must have the same size), returning vectorized outputs \lstinline!out0! and \lstinline!out1! of the same size; the arguments \lstinline!initialPoints! and \lstinline!initialValues! are vectorized accordingly.

The solution, $z$, can be described in terms of characteristics:
\begin{equation*}
z(\xi+\int_{t}^{t+\beta}\! v(\alpha) \mathrm{d}\alpha,\, t+\beta) = z(\xi, t), \quad\text{for all $\beta$ as long as staying inside the domain}
\end{equation*}
This allows the direct computation of the solution based on interpolating the boundary conditions.

When a \lstinline!spatialDistribution!-expression is discrete-time (see \cref{discrete-time-expressions}), events will be generated in order to allow the value to change at the correct points in time, and it is an error if both \lstinline!x! and \lstinline!in0! or \lstinline!in1! change at the same event.

> Further, when a \lstinline!spatialDistribution!-expression is non-discrete-time and event generation is enabled (not appearing inside \lstinline!noEvent!), discontinuities in \lstinline!in0! and \lstinline!in1! may be preserved in the distribution $z$, and trigger events when appearing in any of the operator outputs.

Reviewer: I also realized that this line suggest that one can write:
`(, out1) = noEvent(spatialDistribution(in0, 0, x, true, {0,1}, {0,0}));`
to disable event generation for spatialDistribution, similarly as for other operators.

That makes sense, but two points:
* That should preferably be clarified, as `noEvent` was previously described for "expressions", but multi-returning functions aren't really "expressions".
* If `in0` is an integer expression it would seem that we generate a non-discrete-time integer - is that intentional? This might indicate that there might be additional problems for non-Real `spatialDistribution`.

Author: > * That should preferably be clarified, as `noEvent` was previously described for "expressions", but multi-returning functions aren't really "expressions".

Done.

> * If `in0` is an integer expression it would seem that we generate a non-discrete-time integer - is that intentional? This might indicate that there might be additional problems for non-Real `spatialDistribution`.

Yes, that is intentional and worth explaining.  I have added a non-normative section.

It is a quality of implementation to avoid excessive generation of events by only preserving significant discontinuities.

> Disregarding the event-triggering handling of discontinuities, \lstinline!spatialDistribution! for $T$ being \lstinline!Real! can be described in terms of the pseudo-code given as a block:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Disregarding the event-triggering handling of discontinuities, \lstinline!spatialDistribution! can be described in terms of the pseudo-code given as a block:
```
Similarly.
